content/topics/repetitive-cta/index.mdx, before:

---
title: 'UYA: Repetitive calls to action'
displayTitle: 'Repetitive calls to action'
accentColor: '#F8F3A3'
keyTakeaways:
  - 'Make the most of your re-usable React components, without compromising accessibility'
  - 'Ensure screen reader users can engage with your content when multiple similar selections are available'
readingList:
  - url: 'https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-label_attribute'
    description: 'MDN web docs: Using the aria-label attribute'
---

## Considering component re-use

It's tempting when re-using a React component for multiple items in a list to have the same CTA button or link text on each. For example, a simple boxed button element might look like:

<Gist url="https://gist.github.com/aitchiss/91321e638c575991fc4eeb5b7e9ea3c0" />

Turn your screen reader on and consider the example button boxes list created using the above component. Tab through the call to
action buttons and note the screen reader output:

<div className="repetitive-buttons-wrapper">
  <ButtonBox description="Apply for a loan" buttonText="Find out more" />
  <ButtonBox
    description="Apply for a savings account"
    buttonText="Find out more"
  />
</div>

Did the screen reader announce anything useful to you? Without the
visual context of the "Apply for... " titles, the buttons don't make
a lot of sense on their own, so it's important to add a more
descriptive label for screen reader users. This can either be
accomplished by adding text and displaying off-screen (using CSS),
or simply by wrapping the button description with an aria-label. For example, the ButtonBox element above can be updated to:

<Gist url="https://gist.github.com/aitchiss/5bc564d142a0b9c13f7ce4f013a7c30e" />

Using your screen reader, now tab to the button below and notice the button/call to action text is now much more descriptive and allow users to easily distinguish between the actions attached to each item in the list:

<ButtonBox
  description="Apply for a savings account - accessibly!"
  buttonAriaLabel="Find out more about savings accounts"
  buttonText="Find out more"
/>

Commit message:

add screen reader intro mdx

content/topics/repetitive-cta/index.mdx, after:

---
title: 'UYA: Repetitive calls to action'
displayTitle: 'Repetitive calls to action'
description: 'Do you have multiple buttons with the same text repeating in your list items? This topic considers how screen readers interpret repetitive buttons and how to easily distinguish them.'
accentColor: '#F8F3A3'
keyTakeaways:
  - 'Make the most of your re-usable React components, without compromising accessibility'
  - 'Ensure screen reader users can engage with your content when multiple similar selections are available'
readingList:
  - url: 'https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-label_attribute'
    description: 'MDN web docs: Using the aria-label attribute'
---

## Considering component re-use

It's tempting when re-using a React component for multiple items in a list to have the same CTA button or link text on each. For example, a simple boxed button element might look like:

<Gist url="https://gist.github.com/aitchiss/91321e638c575991fc4eeb5b7e9ea3c0" />

Turn your screen reader on and consider the example button boxes list created using the above component. Tab through the call to
action buttons and note the screen reader output:

<div className="repetitive-buttons-wrapper">
  <ButtonBox description="Apply for a loan" buttonText="Find out more" />
  <ButtonBox
    description="Apply for a savings account"
    buttonText="Find out more"
  />
</div>

Did the screen reader announce anything useful to you? Without the
visual context of the "Apply for... " titles, the buttons don't make
a lot of sense on their own, so it's important to add a more
descriptive label for screen reader users. This can either be
accomplished by adding text and displaying off-screen (using CSS),
or simply by wrapping the button description with an aria-label. For example, the ButtonBox element above can be updated to:

<Gist url="https://gist.github.com/aitchiss/5bc564d142a0b9c13f7ce4f013a7c30e" />

Using your screen reader, now tab to the button below and notice the button/call to action text is now much more descriptive and allow users to easily distinguish between the actions attached to each item in the list:

<ButtonBox
  description="Apply for a savings account - accessibly!"
  buttonAriaLabel="Find out more about savings accounts"
  buttonText="Find out more"
/>
